---
layout: post
title: "CSS Guidelines: OOCSS principles and BEM methodology patterns"
---

Authors note

> These tips are from moments when I don't know what do while working on real wolrd projects. All the time, when this moment comes while working, my flow slows down - and sometimes, I will take 5 to 10 mins break and then come back to the moment.

Consider the two buttons below.

(show a design below for a normal button and a primary button)

[the design]  (design it nice just like those diagrams in the downloads folder)

To implement the buttons, the HTML is simple, here's the base markup for both of them.

```html
<a class="btn">
	Full Story
</a>
```

Accessable buttons are either markup with an `a` or `button` element.

And here is the common style for all the buttons

```css
.btn {
  display: inline-flex;
  align-items: center;
  justify-content: center;
  overflow: hidden;
  width: auto;
  height: 44px;
  padding: 8px 16px;
  border: none;
  background-color: transparent;
  border-radius: 100px /* 1 */
  cursor: pointer;
  font-size: 1rem;
  font-weight: bold;
  letter-spacing: 0.03ch;
  text-decoration: none;
  user-select: none;
  white-space: nowrap;
}
```

Just incase, if you are not sure of any property above, look it up at [MDN]

- 1 - If all our buttons are rounded, we could happily leaves this here, but if just few are rounded, it will be better to have a modifier class called `.btn--rounded` and that declaration into that. If you don't get this don't worry, we will get to it soon.

Now, we will extend the `.btn` class with a [BEM] modifier class to handle a different button style. Here's a [gentle introduction t BEM methodology], incase if you don't know it.

[Let's start with primary buttons, must of the time, they have a solid background color.

The code for creating the primary button will look like so:

```css
.btn--primary {
    background-color: gold;
  	color: black;
}

.btn--primary:hover {
  	background-color: goldenrod;
}
```

We've to expand our current implementation of the HTML, so that the style (declarations) needed for the primary button to work.

```html
<a class="btn btn--primary">
	Full Story
</a>
```

## The gist of this guideline

Okay, that was a basic one, now, let's look at the gist of this tip -- complex moments, where you have to pause and think for a moment.

Here's the design of the button. At first, I didn't know what to called it -- naming things is the hardest part for an engineer.

[the design]

Here's is one way to creat the markup for this button:

```html
<a class="btn">
	<span class="btn__icon">
        <svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" width="16" height="16" class="ob-icon" viewBox="0 0 16 16">
            <path d="M4 8a.5.5 0 0 1 .5-.5h5.793L8.146 5.354a.5.5 0 1 1 .708-.708l3 3a.5.5 0 0 1 0 .708l-3 3a.5.5 0 0 1-.708-.708L10.293 8.5H4.5A.5.5 0 0 1 4 8z"/>
        </svg>
    </span>
    <span>
    	Full Story
    </span>
</a>
```

The markup without the `svg` just to make it easy for you to consume it, the first time.

```html
<a class="btn">
	<span class="btn__icon">
        <!-- the icon here -->
    </span>
    <span>
    	Full Story
    </span>
</a>
```

Let's say I decided to call this type of button seamless, I will extend the class in the markup like this:

```html
<a class="btn btn--seamless">
	<span class="btn__icon">
        <!-- the icon here -->
    </span>
    <span>
    	Full Story
    </span>
</a>
```

This way we inherit all the declarations applied to the `.btn` class.

Now, we can overide or add to the `btn` class with the `btn--seamless` class modifier like this:

```css
/* Modifier */
.btn--seamless {
  padding-inline-start: 0;
  padding-inline-end: 0;
  gap: 24px;  
}
```

In the above code, we remove the right and left margin for the seamless button and add a gap between the icon and the text.

This is one of the most important concepts in Object Oriented CSS and BEM methodology.

Let's consider the icon in the button  now.

In most cases, icons are enclosed in a parent element, and that is a good thing for us. We will set the display of the icon container to `inline-flex` and automatically center the icon it-self to the center of this container regardless of it's size:

```css
.btn__icon {
  display: inline-flex;
  align-items: center;
  justify-content: center;
  border-radius: 100% /* 1 */
  width: 32px;
  height: 32px;  
}
```

## The real gist of this guidline

[Primary, Secondary and  Seamless button designs] ( a diagram show the primary buttons and seconday button variousion) 

[have each button in column form with labels with nice typography above - like the diagrams in the downloads folder]

If you study the designs above carefully, The following are some of the things we should consider:

- The style of the primary button is what we want on the button icon of the seamless button, not the seamless button it-self.
- The default size and fill of the svg are 16px and black respectively, but we would like to change that.

How do you solve these? 

There is no one way to solve these, The chosen solution depends on the engineer and on how you architect your CSS code base -- atleast, for me, this wasn't a simple design decision to make, because of the way we arhitect our CSS code base using [ITCSS]. And secondly, when all use cases of the components are not know when the 

.



The structure and schema of the database is not as self-evident as it was with relational databases. The chosen schema must be one which  supports the use cases of the application the best. This is not a simple design decision to make, as all use cases of the applications are not  known when the design decision is made.

Paradoxically, schema-less databases like Mongo require developers to make far more radical design decisions about data organization at the  beginning of the project than relational databases with schemas. On  average, relational databases offer a more-or-less suitable way of  organizing data for many applications.



```
.cp-button__icon {
  @include dp-flex;
  @include dp-flex-center;
  border-radius: var(--shape-rounded-full);
  width: var(--spacing-larger);
  height: var(--spacing-larger);
  //transition: all .5s var(--smooth-ease);
  

  svg {
    width: var(--spacing-large);
    height: var(--spacing-large);
  }
}



// Modifiers
.cp-button--seamless {
  padding-inline-start: 0;
  padding-inline-end: 0;
  gap: var(--spacing-default);  
}

.cp-button--seamless-primary {
  .cp-button__icon {
    background-color: var(--primary-enabled);

    svg {
     fill: var(--primary-enabled-text-color);
    }
  }
}
```



svg {
    width: var(--spacing-large);
    height: var(--spacing-large);
  }

 



.btn {
  position: relative;

}
